---
layout: default
title: Network and System Defence
---
**Academic Year 2021/2022**   

{% capture local-url %}{{ site.url }}{{ page.id }}{% endcapture %}

## General Infomation

The course is given by Professors [Marco Bonola](http://netgroup.uniroma2.it/people/postdoc/marco-bonola/) and [Alessandro Pellegrini]({{ site.url }}).

The course will be delivered in presence. We will also use Microsoft Teams to provide students with news and course material. You can join the Teams channel using [this link](https://teams.microsoft.com/l/team/19:7dwetWO24jlAIOf4G3r1mCwiZfPSeObHe6hgpatAfWQ1%40thread.tacv2/conversations?groupId=c8488fe0-b852-41c7-9cb9-cf2babfae24e&tenantId=24c5be2a-d764-40c5-9975-82d08ae47d0e).

## Course Objectives

The course focuses on cybersecurity aspects of modern "Internet-based" systems, considering existing vulnerabilities, countermeasures, and real-world deployments (with live demonstrations). The approach of the course is bottom up: we will consider modern complex systems from the hardware, up to the user, highlighting how different vulnerabilities could be exploited, and how these systems can be hardened at the software/configuration level.

At the end of the course, the students will have acquired knowledge of the internal functioning of modern (distributed) ICT systems, with a special focus on the general methodologies and techniques that can be exploited to enhance their level of security.

## Course and Exam Rules

The exam consists in a project, which will be assigned to the students during the course. The project can be handed to one of the Professors at any date (after booking an appointment) **by the end of the academic year** (unfortunately, *no* extensions can be granted for any reason). 

There are two flavors of the final project: some students are attending a **6 CFU course**, others a **9 CFU course**. In both cases, the students are required to attend all lectures: the difference in the didactic load relates to the length and the difficulty of assigned projects.

## Course Topics (tentative)

* Access networks and perimetral security
* Core Networks
* End-to-end security
* Hardware and Operating Systems security
* Virtualization and Cloud security

## Teaching Material

The teaching material will be published on the dedicated Teams channel, during the lectures.
