---
layout: default
title: Network and System Defence
---
**Academic Year 2022/2023**   

{% capture local-url %}{{ site.url }}{{ page.id }}{% endcapture %}

## General Infomation

The course is given by Professors [Alessandro Pellegrini]({{ site.url }}) and Angelo Tulumello.

The course will be delivered in presence. We will also use Microsoft Teams to provide students with news and course material. The link to the Team will be provided as soon as it is created.

## Course Objectives

Safe use of modern information systems requires that professionals in each area of information technology have a broad understanding of the potential critical issues in using systems over the entire stack: hardware, communication networks, operating systems, software applications, and data management. In this way, it is possible to recognise, at the design or implementation stages of an ICT system, what the possible dangers are and what countermeasures should be taken to raise the level of security. 

Within the Network and Systems Defence course, the methodologies and techniques behind some of the vulnerabilities of the various hardware/software stack layers will be shown to illustrate defence techniques and methodologies to make systems more secure and resilient.

The course focuses on cybersecurity aspects of modern "Internet-based" systems, considering existing vulnerabilities, countermeasures, and real-world deployments (with live demonstrations). The approach of the course is bottom up: we will consider modern complex systems from the hardware, up to the user, highlighting how different vulnerabilities could be exploited, and how these systems can be hardened at the software/configuration level.

At the end of the course, the students will have acquired knowledge of the internal functioning of modern (distributed) ICT systems, with a special focus on the general methodologies and techniques that can be exploited to enhance their level of security.

## Course and Exam Rules

The exam consists in a project, which will be assigned to the students during the course. There are two flavours of the final project: some students are attending a **6 CFU course**, others a **9 CFU course**. Information on the rules to hand in the project and the difference between the two flavours will be provided shortly.

## Course Topics (tentative)

* Security frameworks
* Access networks and perimeter security
* Core Networks
* End-to-end security
* Hardware and Operating Systems security
* Visualisation and Cloud security
* Database Security

## Teaching Material

The teaching material will be published on the dedicated Teams channel, during the lectures.
